---
layout: publication
title: Characterizing the vascular morphology of the wound mimic fou2
categories: publication

work-type: poster
ref-authors: Johnston MG, Lenglet A, Farmer EE
ref-year: 2015
ref-title: Characterizing the vascular morphology of the wound mimic fou2
ref-journal: SUR 2015, UNIL, Switzerland
ref-vol: NA
ref-doi: NA
preprint-doi: NA
---
Plants are shaped by their interaction with animals,
investing heavily in defences when under attack.
This leads to many changes, including the
production of noxious compounds, signalling to
predators of the feeding herbivore, and increased
defence structures. Some of these changes are not
yet clearly understood. To study these effects a
screen was carried out for plants with increased
oxylipin levels, a precursor to the wound hormone:
jasmonate. This screen found fou2 a gain-offunction mutation in the Two Pore Channel 1 (TPC1)
channel. In addition to increased oxylipin levels, the
plant displays a severe wound mimic phenotype at
4 weeks old, including: shortened petioles,
anthocyanin accumulation and epinastic leaves; as
well as a potassium starvation phenotype. Recently,
it was found that fou2 also had dramatically
thickened cell walls in the vasculature, especially a
large increase of esterified pectin.
The TPC1 channel, well-studied in animals, is a
vacuolar cation channel controlled by both cytosolic
and vacuolar calcium levels. The fou2 point
mutation, D454N, is in the luminal calcium sensor
of the channel and renders it less sensitive to
calcium increase in the vacuole. This led to the
reverse genetics approach of crossing fou2 with
cax1-3, a mutant for the main vacuolar calcium
exchanger, so as to prevent the assumed calcium
accumulation in the vacuole due to fou2. Indeed,
the cax1-3/fou2 double mutant appears almost
wild-type. Another method of reverting the fou2
phenotype is to cross fou2 into a line which cannot
produce jasmonate: aos. The aos/fou2 double
mutant also reverts a majority of the fou2
phenotype.


The main aim of the project was to quantify the
differences in vascular morphology between wildtype plants and fou2, and secondarily to test if the
defence phenotype was also reverted in the double
mutants. To accomplish this we harvested petioles
from 5 week old plants, grown in short day
conditions (10 h light), and embedded them in
resin. The samples were sectioned at 3 µm and
stained for general acidic amino acids for the cell
wall (2 % toluidine blue) and for esterified pectin
(0.02 % ruthenium red) for three minutes.
The sections were imaged at X400 for subsequent
analysis. An automated macro in ImageJ was made
for quantification of cell area, cell density and
amount of stain in the phloem and xylem
parenchyma.


Analysis of ten biological replicates per phenotype
showed that fou2 plants had a smaller cell area on
average than wild-type (62.5 µm and 73.6 µm,
respectively in phloem parenchyma) and a 2-fold
increase in esterified pectin (38.6 % in xylem
parenchyma), yet had the same cell density. This
strongly suggested that fou2 cells shrunk due to
the creation of a secondary cell wall, not due to a
proliferation of smaller cells, which would also have
had an increased quantity of stain.
Both mutant lines, aos and cax1-3, also reverted
the phenotype of fou2 in the vasculature, which
indicated that the thickening of cell walls was both
calcium- and jasmonate-dependant. It is especially
interesting that aos reverts the vasculature
phenotype, as the calcium imbalance likely still
exists. This can refute one hypothesis that
esterified pectin was created by the plant to
sequester the calcium.


To demonstrate that fou2 was a true wound mimic
an experiment was carried out where wild-type
plants and myc2-322B, a novel mutant which
exaggerates wounding-phenotypes, were
repetitively wounded. These plants were examined,
and preliminary data suggests that the same effect,
enlarged cell walls, occurs; however to a lesser
extent. Additionally, the cells show two distinct cell
wall types with differing electron density, adding
weight to the idea of secondary wall creation.
However, more biochemical analysis is required.
These data imply that wild-type plants attempt to
defend their vasculature, which is a vital structure
for the plant and a rich source of nutrients for
herbivores, by thickening their cell walls as
observed in fou2. 

[SUR 2015 UNIL Programme](https://www.unil.ch/eb-sur/files/live/sites/eb-sur/files/Previous_SUR/SUR2015/SUR_programme2015_Brochure_Final_v19.10.2015_REDUIT.pdf)
